Talking to Walter Crunk.
Keep this here, if you don't mind.
Your tape recorder might pick up the munching of the lobster sandwich.
That's right.
I'm used to it.
As long as there's no music in the background, that's the end.
That's what usually is the killer.
So what do you miss the most?
I'm sure everybody wonders.
Oh, I miss editing.
I'm not talking about fancy.
I miss being on the desk every day.
I love being a managing editor.
I like taking the news off the press service wires from my correspondence, if you please, and hunching stories, getting people on them, getting them done right.
and editing the copy.
I just like, I like daily journalism.
I don't at all dislike covering it.
I like that a great deal, too.
I would be very unhappy, I think, if I were frozen on a newspaper desk somewhere and never got out on the street at all.
I'd certainly be unhappy, I think, being an anchorman and never getting out an occasional story.
I do have a feeling that anchor people are overused today in their unbreaking story.
I feel that an awful lot of that is showboating.
You call it parachuting the men.
Yeah, the parachuting.
That's a great phrase.
Exactly.
Wow.
Big footing.
I've had my notes too.
I'm sorry to interrupt you.
But that is a comment on what's happening.
And these guys aren't really reporters.
That's the irony of the whole thing, are they?
Well, not the network guys.
Those three fellows are all damn fine reporters.
They did their apprenticeship well.
Brokaw and the
And I think not only good reporters, but I think they are good extemporaneous broadcasters.
Once they've done their reporting, I think they're very good.
But they don't have the opportunity to report like a newspaper person does
really dig deep and then write deep.
That's the main thing that differentiates, I think, broadcasters from press, print journalism, is that the print journalist still is capable of putting together a thousand-word story, or a much longer story, a real breaking story.
That is an extremely difficult task.
It requires an awful lot of organizational skill, keeping a lot of things in mind.
The whole idea is only too well, I'm not telling you, but the idea of knowing how you progress through a story to get all those facts in and play them again.
at the proper point in the story.
And knowing what the lead is.
Well, that's what I was just going to say.
Knowing the lead and then the whole inverted pyramid idea, I think it's been lost almost in print.
And it never was there in broadcast journalism.
The skills of a good...
print reporter, accurately, almost instantly when they get into broadcasting.
Happened to me, to a degree, and it's happened to every writer I try to bring from a press service over to my news desk.
I wanted press service people, I wanted a card who were fast and accurate.
I wanted people who weren't going to write particularly fancily, but would get the facts out quickly.
And I wanted people who understood the press service business so they would not assume that every press service story was word from God.
I wanted them to question the press service story when they come in.
Having worked with the press service 11 years, I know that we make mistakes and miss the lead.
And I want people who are going to read all the 38 paragraphs and say, wait a minute, the lead's down there in the 8th paragraph.
We could be two news cycles ahead on the evening news, and were, because of me, mostly.
That's one of the rare areas that I claim dominance.
But I was absolutely terrific at that.
I said, we were not.
Of course, our main wire all day was the day wire.
I said...
We don't write off the day wire.
We don't write even the leads off the night wire, which are just beginning to come in as we have to close our broadcasts.
We don't even write the lead off that.
We have to look through that, and we've got to write the overnight story.
That's the story for the next afternoon, the newspapers.
That's the way it's done our press service.
And there's no reason why we can't do it here in the newsroom.
Now, you're talking about breaking news here, of course.
I'm talking about breaking news.
Oh, sure.
I mean, the features I notice as a devoted reader of the New York Times, I can pretty much predict that the features on the evening news are going to be five days after I read the Times.
Of course you can.
Sure.
And that's the way it is.
I mean, I think they have editors at the networks reading, clipping the Times every morning.
You know, that's the nature of the piece.
You're a deadline, as you indicated.
You're a deadline journalist.
I sensed it.
I read someplace that this book had been under contract, I guess, for about 20 years.
Is that about one?
Yeah.
So what took you so long?
Well...
Do you feel that you have to have a deadline pushing you to get the time?
That's a great deal part of it.
Although I never did have a deadline, really.
At one point I had a deadline for this book that I'd overran in a couple of years.
The story of the contract for this book is one of
of utter disinterest on my part and major sloth.
It occurred, a good friend of mine was a vice president at Knopf.
It happened.
And in fact, he was a family member at Knopf, somehow or other.
Peter Schulte was his name.
Tony Schulte.
Peter was his son.
Tony Schote took my kids with his kids, who were classmates, skiing almost every weekend.
And we met and had family dinner, kind of, when they got back on Sunday evening.
And Tony started nagging me to write a book.
I'm talking, this was in the 60s.
And he started nagging me, I should write a book.
I said, I have no interest in writing a book.
I'm not going to write a book.
Nag, nag, nag.
I mean, every Sunday night again.
And I got pretty sick of it.
We may have had a couple of martinis by that time one evening when I said, Tony, I'll make a deal with you.
I will promise you that Knopf can have my memoirs if I ever write them.
If you can promise me that nobody cannot ever mention this to me again, and I want no advance payment, because I don't want anything hanging out of my head.
You didn't take an advance on that?
No, no.
I said no advance payment, and I promise that you'll have the book, but you've got to promise me that nobody ever mentions this again.
And when was this about?
Oh, about 1960.
Let me see.
60s?
Yeah.
That's it.
Oh, no, everybody's 70.
I'm sorry.
25 years.
72.
72, yep.
And nobody, Knopf, ever did.
I must say there was a little bit of an entract there that we made this deal over the dinner table on Sunday night.
It was a handshake.
It was a handshake deal.
I thought, well, I didn't even think about it.
I thought that was a joke, and it was over, and, you know, that was it.
The next day morning, my agent called me, who had never known to have gotten up before 10.30 in the morning.
He called me at 9.30, and I knew it was a major crisis when he called at 9.30.
He said, Walter, Walter, what's this about?
You're writing a book.
And he knew Tony Schulte also, as I did, from his friends.
And, uh,
He said, what's this right around me?
I said, I'm not writing about it.
What do you mean?
He said, Tony, sure, he thinks you are.
He's just been on the phone to me.
And he's got the contract drawn, wants to meet us for lunch.
Naturally, part of his role, he ought to meet you for lunch.
He wants to get it written down.
Yeah.
So he arrived with, we met at lunch, and sure enough, he had a contract.
saying just what I'd specified.
You got it in there that he'd never brought you?
That nobody, Knopf, could ever mention it to me.
They said it just that way, could never mention it.
And I simply found a book, but there was no deadline.
If I ever wrote a book, as the way it was phrased, Knopf could have it, a memoir.
Knopf could have it.
Well, we signed it, and also it was classified.
that the payment from Knopf for this was a dollar and other considerations.
That's a great story.
So we left.
I get a call.
I'm back from lunch.
There's a call from Tony, already my secretary.
Tony has called.
Walter, Walter's friend.
He said, our lawyers turned down the contract.
They said that a dollar...
was not adequate considerations and therefore would never hold up in court.
I said, well, then there's no deal.
I'm not going to have any money hanging over my head to write a book.
And he said, well, wait a minute, wait a minute.
It's only $10,000.
I said, definitely no deal.
$10,000, $10,000.
He said, Walter, look, if you're worried about it.
I said, you know, if I don't write the book, you're going to want $10,000 back someday.
And with interest and all of that, I'm not going to get involved in that.
And he said, Walter, you can put it in escrow.
Well, I'm so dumb financially.
I said, what's escrow?
And he said, you can put it in the bank for a specific purpose, and it doesn't draw interest, but it's always available to be withdrawn.
So I said, well, I'll do that.
That's okay.
So I called up Sticks, and I said, my agent, I said,
I've made a different kind of a deal with Tony sending over the contract.
I'm going to take $10,000.
I said, oh, that's fine.
That's okay.
Obviously, I'm going to get 10% or so of it.
So anyway, he thinks that's fine until I said, I'm putting it in escrow.
Then he said, you can't do that.
It doesn't draw interest.
I said, that's just the point.
Well, anyway, we...
That was the contract.
And it lasted for about 18 years or more, with nobody at Knopf ever mentioning it to me again, including Tony Schultz.
Never heard from anybody, no words.
And I was perfectly happy in these circumstances.
But I had a book kind of in my mind, so I'd write little notes to myself.
Occasionally I'd write them.
four or five pages.
Was it this book that you had in your mind?
Yeah.
I mean, someday I might want to put a book together.
And then, about four or five years ago, now, one of the officials at Random House, a friend of mine, called and he said, let's have lunch.
We never had lunch.
I said, Bob,
Before we have lunch, I want you to be sure that you've read that contract very carefully.
And he is kind of a humorous guy, and he said, I read it.
He said, all right, I want to have lunch with you.
So when we went to lunch, we talked about a lot of mutual interest, amnesty, and a lot of boards we serve on kind of together.
He was waiting for you to bring it up.
He was hoping that I would bring it up, I guess.
We finished lunch, got the coffee, and he said, Walter,
would you consider that I have broken the contract, which maybe I already have by bringing this up, if I said just one word?
And I said, I'm so fascinated at what one word you could say that would make any difference.
Say it.
He said, right.
Well, that opened the discussion, obviously.
And at this point, I wrote it.
We did a serious contract with a serious
six-figure advance and a three-year deadline.
And I ran two years over that one.
So this was about 91 then?
Yup.
And at that time, I began doing some fairly, I wouldn't call it concentrated writing, but I wrote a chapter eventually.
sent that over to Ash Green, and he didn't think much of it, apparently.
I don't know.
He didn't get terribly enthusiastic.
As a matter of fact, the first two chapters I worked up, we called Ash, we had lunch.
You've got to have lunch with your publisher in New York.
It's the only way you do business.
And we had lunch.
And I had prepared, I'd sent it over to him,
And he called and said, let's have lunch and talk about it.
And I prepared a little note to him, because Ash Green is a wonderful, interesting, intellectual, I like to have lunch with.
And I handed him, as we sat down to lunch, I handed him a sheet of paper that I had written on.
And I said, Ash, rather than our discussion, my two chapters, which might ruin our friendship and the lunch,
I've never had a book before, and I don't know how you perform, but I can see myself being offended over your criticism, and I can see you having a lot of criticism.
I think I'd have it myself about these two drafts, chapters.
So I present you with this note that you can simply, it's a morbid answer question,
You can select one or more of these answers.
The more of them you select, the less sincere I think you really are.
But here they are.
And the thing says, well, I can't remember them all now.
There were five of them.
But one, the first one was, A, was water.
These chapters are very interesting.
We'd like to see a few more before we get to it.
And this is what you drafted.
This is what I drafted.
And B was Walter.
We've got some very good people who have worked with some of our famous authors in the past.
C was Walter.
I think I'd like to see some of your more serious chapters.
D was something, but the final one was, Walter, I don't think you understand how the publishing business has changed since your contract was signed.
Well, so what did he, was his reaction, did he laugh?
His reaction, and I say this, if you report it with a big smile of affection, Ash is a very kind of a doer guy.
Good sense of humor, but not a laughing fellow, fortunately in a way.
He took it, looked at it, folded it, put it in his pocket and said, now about those two chapters.
Did he recommend many changes in that?
No, no.
That was kind of part of the problem.
He didn't get it.
involved in changes.
He simply said, I think that these look very good to me.
I'm not sure he said very.
These look all right to me.
And I would like to actually, he did say, I would like to wait until we get down into some of the later years because I was doing it chronologically from birth.
And he said, I'd kind of like to
I'd like to get to, you know, the professional career before we really get interested.
And I assume you're getting back pretty shortly.
Well, I don't know.
It wasn't so encouraging that I wanted to rush back to the computer.
And so another year passed.
Another year.
I think so.
And really, I didn't get down to it, really didn't get to it seriously.
I just had more things to do.
There were more interest in writing a book.
I didn't get to it until I had a knee operation last January.
So really, January, once you got into it, you apparently put it together rather quickly?
Six months, January to June.
Was it fun once you started going with it?
Oh, great fun.
Or was it a pain in the neck?
Oh, well, it was...
It was fun to write, fun to play with the words, fun to get the thing organized properly.
I think organization was the worst problem I had with it, I think, as other people have with any kind of memoir.
Whether you stay chronological, it's a terrible problem.
I had a lot of... One of the things that made it
As fast as it was, I had some superb research help from one of my dear friends at CBS, who's now retired CBS, Joe Worshba.
And I could toss things to him.
Just things like dates, but quotations and things, you know.
I've got my wife doing money for you.
Yeah, but that is invaluable, as you know, and time saver, that is.
And they have to be so reliable, too.
One thing, the only problem I had with Joe Worshman and his wife, they're both professionals, both producers and writers.
He was a 60 Minutes producer and writer, reporter.
before that but the biggest problem i had with him he writes superbly well and he also is an absolutely insufferably indefatigable researcher i'd ask him for what was the date of the new london texas school disaster well i know that story intimately having been there four days it's my story i don't need any
research on it, he turns out a chapter about the New London, Texas School.
And I don't have time to plow through it.
I mean, this was kind of a standing joke between Joe and his wife and I, because his wife keeps saying, give him a page.
He doesn't need a chapter.
But in that material, there'd be some beautiful lines, really good lines.
I was so tempted to use them, but I was determined.
and determined that not one word of this book would be written by anybody other than me.
That's one of my questions, you know.
What if they had, say, said to you, hey, there's a guy by the name of Novak, you know, who helped Tim, who helped these other guys?
Well, that was never suggested by name, but occasionally people would say, well... That's just for instance.
They would say, why don't you dictate it and we can fill it.
You know, gee, that's an insult.
There are a lot of your colleagues, however, who haven't felt that way, younger colleagues.
Not only that, there are some who publish some books that I think is disgraceful.
It's not disgraceful that they're putting anything over on anybody.
It's disgraceful that they call themselves journalists and feel they can't write their own book.
What the devil, what kind of journalist is that?
That's the quote I've been waiting for.
You know, towards the end of the book, you say, you have a quote, people usually ask, do you hope that you make a difference?
And you say, surprisingly, you can't say that you did.
I wonder, maybe you could... One of the worst pieces of writing in the book is there, and there's some other examples.
But that was a very bad piece, because it did not make clear...
this has come up before obviously i'm not i had living this answer this has come up before people ask me therefore i know that it's misleading what i meant to say was in television journalism not in life uh i
I think I... Because I think so many of us would disagree with that.
That is what I'm trying to say.
Let me reassure you that that's not the case.
Well, thank you.
I appreciate that because everybody would like to think that they could do it.
But I meant, and the only thing that really, I think, a contribution I've had to make, basically, is perhaps in helping to pioneer a form of journalism which has become a whole...
encompassing and dominating, practically.
And I thought that my generation established a foundation, a set of principles and ethics that would live.
And we had built something like, as solid as the publishing business, with good newspapers, and that CBS's and NBC's
ABCs of this world, being the stolid big boys like the New York Times, would perform like the New York Times with responsibility, with understanding of what their place in society was.
And I don't think that's so today.
I think that the pioneers in ownership, the Paley's, Sarnoff,
while not perhaps entirely cognizant of their responsibility, understood it almost subconsciously because they were forced to.
They went through the early days of the regulation of broadcasting, and they had to sit in for hearing after hearing,
FCC meeting after FCC meeting on what the responsibility of broadcasters is.
Now, the FCC has now, of course, totally abandoned any suggestion that it would regulate responsibility of broadcasters.
But in those days, they were very serious about it.
As you know, for many, many years, radio couldn't editorialize, for instance.
And...
And for a station license, you have to show, as you still do today, for that matter, fairness in the community, although not enforced very much anymore.
So those guys learned that there was a responsibility in the business.
The present people aren't broadcasters, never thought of being broadcasters until it turned out to be a profit center.
I'm not talking here.
Let me be clear.
I'm not talking about the journalists.
But there has been perceived to be a decline in the quality of the news sites at all of the networks.
Maybe you disagree with that.
I certainly think that most of us are news aficionados feel that the news is not really as good as it was.
Plus this tabloid stuff.
The what?
The tabloid...
journalism that we see on television now and the networks kind of being drawn into that to a degree.
Well, of course, the networks are seriously culpable of the fact that all three of them, at least, I think all three of them, CBS does, the others do, they let their O and O's, they let their O and O's put the tabloid stuff in where the news ought to be.
Now, what's an O and O?
owned and operating stations.
They can't control what the other stations do, but they control it in a way.
They could not feed them anything until 7 o'clock at night, you know, at prime time.
As it is, they let their evening news programs go at fringe time, and then these
they put in these tabloid shows at prime time.
The audience is much bigger at 7 and 7.30 than it is at 6.30, if anybody knows that.
Now, that's not, however, you can't let that statement follow immediately after my previous statement regarding the dedication of the pioneers, because they agreed to that 6.30 time slot, too.
I wonder, are there any... When we think of all those of us who grew up with Walter Cronkite, you've just been identified with all the major stories of our times.
And I wouldn't ask you to pick any favorites, but I wonder, are there any stories that you didn't cover that you wished... Oh, every one that I didn't cover.
Even recent ones, but of course you don't seem to have that much...
anxiety about having missed the recent political conventions, however, based on your feelings of what's become of the political... Well, I've had anxiety about missing them.
I hate to miss them, but I don't have any alibi for my work.
I've permitted myself to live under an exclusive contract with CBS all these years.
And instead of
break in and going elsewhere, because I had a kind of loyalty.
But they haven't assigned me to these things, so what else am I going to do?
I'm not going to go out there.
I could go into a newspaper column or something, I suppose, but I don't know.
I'm talking in terms of the conventions.
You're quite open about your evaluation of what's happened with the process to nominate national candidates.
You use some pretty strong language.
in the book, which is uncharacteristic.
You're very kind to most people, except, you know, one gentleman's Van Souter, I guess.
Yeah.
He's my, to me, the bed noir of present-day television journalism.
And I think you express... I must say, his success has been very art-warming to me.
He now runs the public broadcasting station in Sacramento.
It's like the state trooper being sent out to the North Adams Paralympics, I guess.
Would you say that a defining moment in your career was when you, especially a person who was trained in the news services as an objective reporter, making this work?
a political, a state, a taking a stand in the Vietnam War.
Was that a defining moment in your career as a broadcaster?
Defining, I think maybe too strong.
It was certainly, it was unique rather than defining.
We didn't pursue that as an idea that I should do editorials.
and I don't think we should have.
It was certainly a major and dramatic departure from what we'd always done, what I'd always done, and what we'd done television generally, after people didn't step out of their role in those days and do editorial comment.
I only...
I only violated the rule, and whenever I did, and that was three or four times, it was always clearly labeled as such.
It always followed a commercial break so that we could say beforehand, when I come back, I shall have some personal opinion on this.
And then when we came back from the commercial break, this is my personal opinion on this.
And the only other times other than Vietnam were twice on what I would call freedom of press issues, where I had a personal philosophy that, damn it, if we didn't defend freedom of press, who was going to?
So we had to speak out in those cases.
And of course, when your decision to cover the Watergate story the way that you did made a local story
an international story because really the Washington papers Congress is their city hall basically it's a city hall story and really that's what happened to a great extent when you all of a sudden said look at these two guys are doing covering down there and that was a pretty interesting dynamic journalism work I would think we did the story I'm almost proudest of I'm very proud of Watergate
I'm proud that we did Vietnam.
The only problem I had with that one was that the instigation of that was somewhat egotistical.
I mean, the idea that because we had a fairly loyal audience, or at least an audience that believed that CBS was impartial, and...
and unbiased, unprejudiced, and therefore they might want to listen to my view of what this complicated thing was about.
That was egotistical.
But Watergate was not tinged with that, nor was the story of a different nature, which was the serendipity of the Sadat Begin,
And that was purely serendipitous.
I was not, as some of my critics would like to have it, they didn't understand what was happening.
I was not playing diplomat.
I was not raising trial balloons or anything of that kind.
I was trying to knock down the story.
And it just happened because I used some good journalistic enterprise in pinning him down
But when I was startled to find he meant he liked to go, then I didn't let it go at that.
I pinned him down when he could go.
And it turned out that that accelerated the process, which might have happened anyway, but also might have stalled for months or years.
And I was very proud of that one.
Any regrets?
Any stories that you feel that you could have handled differently and better?
Oh, almost daily.
Almost daily.
One of the worst was the one that I go to my grave regretting was a story about Ham Jordan.
I remember Carter's assistant.
And Ham had been kind of a, I don't know, scapegoated.
Well, that's not it either.
He'd been the focus of a
A lot of kind of critical, snide, column-type items in Washington.
You remember there was an incident at a bar where he turned over a drink on a lady or something of the kind.
And then there were some suggestions that there were some narcotics involved.
One time, another, well, Mike Wallace came back from the West Coast with a story he had uncovered.
out there that Pam Jordan, according to his story, this alleged story, that Pam Jordan had been involved in helping supply the coke of the Hollywood party.
And Mike said they weren't going to use it for 60 minutes and that we want it for evening news.
Well, yeah, I wanted a story for the evening news, and we got Mike to help us pursue it, and we came up with a fairly substantial story.
No proof, but enough substantial to make a substantial story.
To go with it.
But, but,
I then yielded to the suggestion of our producer at the time that we lead with it.
An awful, awful mistake.
It put an emphasis on the story which it did not deserve.
It put a credibility on the story it did not deserve.
And did Amjurton a great injustice.
I would say something that Amjurton never called me about.
I didn't hear from anybody at the White House about it.
That was worse.
If they'd called and screamed and hollered, I could have screamed and hollered back.
But as I was, I felt that they had simply said, well, we write him off.
I know you've got another interview coming up.
Oh, yes.
Oh, God, we do.
Could you inscribe a couple of books for me quickly, if you have a chance, one for me?
If you don't mind.
I'm not very good at old fashioned.
I'm Nick.
M-I-C-K?
N. N. N.